Add hello-config module (#371)
nextflow-io/training: docs/hello_nextflow/06_hello_config.md

2. It then executes the pipeline using the default configuration.
3. The pipeline will likely use Docker containers to run the required tools (Samtools and GATK).
4. It processes the input BAM files, creating index files and performing variant calling.
5. The results are generated in the `results` directory by default.
6. Nextflow also creates a `work` directory containing intermediate files and logs.
7. Upon completion, Nextflow displays a summary of the run, including any errors or warnings.

Now let's move on to seeing how this was configured and set up.

### 1.2. Check configuration

Open the `nextflow.config` file and inspect the contents:

```bash
code nextflow.config
```

The contents should look like this:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = true
```

This means that the pipeline will use Docker containers to run the required tools.

### 1.3. Modify configuration

Let's modify the configuration to use Conda instead of Docker.

_Before:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = true
```

_After:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = false

> conda.enabled = true

Reviewer: If you do it, then explain why you do it

```

Now let's run the pipeline again with the modified configuration:

```bash title="nextflow.config"
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk
```

This time, the pipeline will use Conda environments to run the required tools.

## 2. Profiles

Profiles are a way to customize the behavior of Nextflow pipelines by selection, rather than setting them permanently.

### 2.1. Create a profile

_Before:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
docker.enabled = false
conda.enabled = true
```

_After:_

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
profiles {
    'docker' {
        docker.enabled = true

>         conda.enabled = false

Reviewer: I think the enabled = false are overkill.
We have that in nf-core, but we might be doing too much

## 4. Executor

### 4.1. Local executor

Up until now, we have been running our pipeline with the local executor. This runs each step on the same machine that Nextflow is running on. However, for large genomics pipelines, you will want to use a distributed executor. Nextflow supports a number of different distributed executors, including:

-   HPC (SLURM, PBS, SGE)
-   AWS Batch
-   Google Batch
-   Azure Batch
-   Kubernetes

We can modify the executor used by nextflow using the `executor` process directive. Until now, we have been using the `local` executor (default). The following configuration is implied:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="18"
process {
    executor = 'local'
}
```

### 4.2. Other executors

!!! note

    This is a demonstration and designed to go wrong!

If we wish to change executor, we could simply set this to one of the values in the documentation:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="18"
process {
    executor = 'slurm'
}
```

However, if we add this to our config and run the pipeline we will that includes this error:

```console
Cannot run program "sbatch"
```

> Nextflow has interpreted that we wish to submit to a Slurm cluster, which requires te use of the command `sbatch`. However, because we are not _actually_ using Slurm the `sbatch` command is not installed therefore there is an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nextflow has interpreted that we wish to submit to a Slurm cluster, which requires te use of the command `sbatch`. 
However, because our Gitpod instance doesn't have slurm installed (and isn't connected to a cluster)  this throws an error.
```

If we check inside the `.command.run` file created in the work directory, we can see that Nextflow has created a script to submit the job to Slurm.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! reminder

The output of your nextflow console will have the hash of the work subdirectory, which will differ from the paths shown below.
```

I'm not sure if `reminder` is a real option.

```bash title=".command.run" linenums="1"
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -J nf-SAMTOOLS_INDEX_(1)
#SBATCH -o /home/gitpod/work/34/850fe31af0eb62a0eb1643ed77b84f/.command.log
#SBATCH --no-requeue
#SBATCH --signal B:USR2@30
NXF_CHDIR=/home/gitpod/work/34/850fe31af0eb62a0eb1643ed77b84f
### ---
### name: 'SAMTOOLS_INDEX (1)'
### container: 'community.wave.seqera.io/library/samtools:1.20--b5dfbd93de237464'
### outputs:
### - 'reads_father.bam'
### - 'reads_father.bam.bai'
### ...
```

> If our process had more directives, such as `clusterOptions`, `cpus`, `memory`, `queue`, and `time`, these would also be included in the `.command.run` file and directly passed to the Slurm execution. They would also be translated to the equivalent options for other executors. This is how Nextflow creates the commands required to correctly submit a job to the sbatch cluster via a single configuration change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If our process had more directives, such as `clusterOptions`, `cpus`, `memory`, `queue`, and `time`, these would also be included in the `.command.run` file and directly passed to the Slurm execution. 
They would also be translated to the equivalent options for other executors. 
This is how Nextflow creates the commands required to correctly submit a job to the sbatch cluster via a single configuration change.
```

### 4.3. Using Executors in Profiles

Let's combine `profiles` with `executors`. Add the following to your configuration file:

before:

```groovy title="nextflow.config" linenums="1"
profiles {
    'docker' {
        docker.enabled = true
        conda.enabled = false
    }
    'conda' {
        docker.enabled = false
        conda.enabled = true
    }
}
```

After:

```groovy title="nextflow.config"
profiles {
    'docker' {
        docker.enabled = true
        conda.enabled = false
    }
    'conda' {
        docker.enabled = false
        conda.enabled = true
    }
    'local' {
        process.executor = 'local'
    }
    'slurm' {
        process.executor = 'slurm'
    }
}
```

Now run the pipeline using two profiles, `docker` and `local`:

```bash
nextflow run seqeralabs/nf-hello-gatk -profile docker,local
```

> Note, we have returned back to the original configuration of using Docker containers with a local execution, but we can now use profiles to switch to a different software packaging system (conda) or a different executor (slurm) with a single command-line option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have returned to the original configuration of using Docker containers with local execution. 
However, now we can use profiles to switch to a different software packaging system (conda) or a different executor (slurm) with a single command-line option.
```

### 4.3 Seqera Platform

> Setting up and configuring Nextflow for different executors can be complex and time-consuming. Seqera Platform simplifies this process by providing a user-friendly interface to manage and run Nextflow pipelines on various compute platforms. With Seqera Platform, you can easily configure and launch your pipelines on local machines, HPC clusters, cloud environments, and Kubernetes clusters. The platform abstracts the underlying infrastructure, allowing you to focus on your analysis and research without worrying about the technical details of setting up and managing the execution environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting up and configuring Nextflow for different executors can be complex and time-consuming. 
Seqera Platform simplifies this process by providing a user-friendly interface for managing and running Nextflow pipelines on various compute platforms. 
With Seqera Platform, you can easily configure and launch your pipelines on local machines, HPC clusters, cloud environments, and Kubernetes clusters. 
The platform abstracts the underlying infrastructure, allowing you to focus on your analysis and research without worrying about the technical details of setting up and managing the execution environment.
```
